The claims of Branch and Reaves arose out of a series of loan transactions in which they separately borrowed money from American General. In Reaves's case, the first transaction occurred in December 1994, and the second on November 2, 1995. In Branch's case, the first transaction occurred on July 3, 1996; a second on October 18, 1996; and a third on November 21, 1997. The "Note and Security Agreement" signed by Branch on November 21, 1997, contained the following pertinent provisions: "Borrower(s) hereby acknowledge that the transactions evidenced by this agreement involve interstate commerce. Borrower and Lender agree that, except as otherwise set forth in this provision, all claims, disputes, or controversies of every kind and nature between Borrower(s) and Lender shall be resolved by arbitration, including (i) those based on contract, tort or statute, (ii) those arising out of or relating to the transaction(s) evidenced by this agreement, the disclosures relating to this agreement, the Federal Disclosure Statement, any insurance certificates or policies, any documents executed at or about the same time this agreement was executed or (iii) those arising out of, relating to any other prior, proposed or actual loan or extension of credit, (and the relationships which result from these transactions or any other previous transactions between Borrower(s) and Lender). Borrower(s) and Lender further agree that all issues and disputes as to the arbitrability of claims must also be resolved by the arbitrator. "Arbitration of such claims will be conducted by a single arbitrator selected by the Borrower(s) and Lender, pursuant to the Federal Arbitration Act, (the "FAA"), and according to the commercial rules of the American Arbitration Association, at a reasonable and convenient location to be selected by the Borrower(s). Each party shall pay one-half of the arbitration costs and expenses. "BORROWER(S) AND LENDER AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATOR MAY AWARD PUNITIVE DAMAGES ONLY UNDER CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION COULD AWARD SUCH DAMAGES. HOWEVER, IN NO EVENT SHALL AN AWARD OF DAMAGES EXCEED FIVE (5) TIMES THE ECONOMIC LOSS SUFFERED BY THE PARTY. BORROWER(S) AND LENDER FURTHER AGREE THAT THE ARBITRATOR SHALL NOT CONDUCT ANY CLASS–WIDE PROCEEDINGS AND WILL BE RESTRICTED TO RESOLVING THE INDIVIDUAL DISPUTES BETWEEN THE PARTIES." "Borrower(s) and Lender agree that, notwithstanding the foregoing, Lender retains the right to use judicial or self-help remedies (i) to repossess or foreclose on collateral or to enforce the security interests relating to this transaction, and (ii) to pursue collection actions against the Borrower(s) where the amount of the debt is $10,000 or less. The exercise of this right by Lender to pursue judicial or self-help remedies shall not constitute a waiver of Lender's right to compel the arbitration of any claim or dispute subject to this arbitration clause—including the filing of a counterclaim by Borrower(s) in a lawsuit filed by Lender. "The arbitration clause shall be binding upon the assigns, directors, officers, representatives, employees, parent companies, affiliated companies, subsidiaries and successors of Lender, and the administrators, assigns, executors, heirs and representatives of Borrower(s). In addition, the parties agree to submit to arbitration not only the foregoing claims or disputes against each other, but also all claims or disputes they have against (i) all other persons or entities involved with the transactions subject to this clause, (ii) all persons or entities who signed or executed any of the documentation subject to this clause, and (iii) all persons or entities who may be jointly or severally liable to any of the parties to this agreement regarding matters or events relating to the transactions and documentation subject to this clause." The "Note and Security Agreement" executed by Reaves on November 2, 1995, contained arbitration provisions that differed from the ones in Branch's contract in only one material respect. That agreement did not contain the provision purporting to make arbitrable "all issues and disputes as to the arbitrability of claims." Branch and Reaves commenced their actions on June 15, 1998, and September 11, 1998, respectively. Branch sued Merit and Yosemite, as well as American General, while Reaves sued only American General. Broadly stated, the substantive allegations common to both complaints were that the plaintiffs were enticed, pursuant to a scheme or plan, to borrow money under circumstances that enabled the defendants (1) to collect excessive finance charges; (2) to sell customers "duplicative services" through "flipping" and (3) to collect unnecessary or excessive premiums for credit-disability insurance and life insurance. "As supported by the testimony, these finance companies compete for the same market, and Branch and Reaves, typical customers, are not customers who would go to a bank for loans of this sort. "For example, the defendants stipulated to give the arbitrator the power to award costs and attorney fees to the prevailing party; they stipulated to allow the arbitrator to impose injunctive relief; they stipulated that they, the defendants, would pay the filing fees; they stipulated that the arbitrator could award an unlimited amount of compensatory damages. "Additionally, the contract purports to allow the defendant to use the court system to collect amounts up to $10,000.00, which, according to the testimony in this case, would include most of their loans. The headquarters of American General, Inc., are in Indiana. Affidavit testimony in the record indicates that "the money which [American General] provides as loans to its customers is made available to [American General] through an affiliated corporation, American General Finance Corporation ("AGFC"), an Indiana corporation also headquartered in Indiana." "The money is sent to [American General] ... from AGFC's bank account located outside Alabama, and when payments are made by customers to [American General], those funds are ultimately sent out of state to AGFC's bank accounts as repayment of the funds previously furnished to [American General]." Merit, through which American General allegedly sold credit-life insurance to Branch, is an Indiana corporation headquartered in Indiana. Yosemite, through which American General sold credit-disability and credit-property insurance to Branch, is incorporated in California and headquartered in Indiana. "Some of the employees who work at the [American General] branch offices are also licensed agents of Merit and Yosemite." When a customer purchases credit insurance in connection with a loan from American General, he or she "is issued a certificate of insurance from either Merit or Yosemite, which certificate had been previously sent to the American General offices in Alabama." "Information about each customer is gathered in the Alabama branch offices and then transmitted to Merit's or Yosemite's headquarters in Indiana, where it is stored in a computer data base." The arbitration clause in Branch's contract purports to stipulate that the arbitrator is to decide the threshold issues of arbitrability, such as whether the arbitration clause itself is unconscionable. It applies to every "dispute[ ] or controversy[ ] ... relating to" every actual or potential transaction—whether past, present, or future—and to every person, whether signatory or nonsignatory to any document, involved in such a transaction between the parties. In this connection, Branch testified by affidavit: "All of the documents and forms I signed which were used in borrowing the money in question were provided to me by American General Finance, Inc. I did not provide any of them, I did not have any input into them, and I did not have any choice about what documents to sign if I wanted to borrow the money. I was told that in order to borrow the money I had to sign all the paperwork where they showed me." Moreover, the record contains evidence indicating that when Branch acquired her loans from American General on July 3, 1996; October 18, 1996; and November 21, 1997, the market was virtually closed to consumers seeking comparable financing without agreeing to arbitration provisions. The record contains stipulations and affidavit testimony of 8 of the 16 companies (the 8 including American General) that were listed in the advertising pages of the Southern Directory Company telephone directory for the City of Tuscaloosa under the heading "Financing." The other seven companies are Associates Financial Services Company of Alabama, Inc.; TranSouth Financial Corporation; AVCO Financial Services of Alabama, Inc.; First Family Financial Services, Inc.; City Finance Company of Alabama, Inc.; Norwest Financial Alabama, Inc.; and Household Finance Corporation of Alabama. Of these companies, only Household Finance Corporation of Alabama "did not routinely enter into arbitration agreements in connection with its loans during the 1994–97 time frame." Norwest Financial Alabama, Inc., and AVCO Financial Services of Alabama, Inc., began requiring loan applicants to sign arbitration agreements in August 1995. Associates Financial Services Company of Alabama, Inc.; TranSouth Financial Corporation; and First Family Financial Services, Inc., began requiring loan applicants to sign arbitration agreements in May 1996. City Finance Company of Alabama, Inc., began requiring loan applicants to sign arbitration agreements in October 1996. Thus, when Branch applied for her November 21, 1997, loan, only one of the entities, namely, Household Finance Corporation of Alabama, did not require loan applicants to agree to arbitrate. Indeed, when she applied to American General for her first loan on July 3, only two of the companies, namely, Household Finance Corporation of Alabama, and City Finance Company of Alabama, Inc., did not require arbitration agreements. We note that "[e]ntire segments of the market for certain goods and services ... are being closed to consumers who are unwilling to forfeit the rights guaranteed them by the federal and state constitutions." In fact, she testified that she had borrowed money from "Citizens Bank" in Greensboro on two occasions since 1995 and that neither transaction involved an arbitration agreement. Moreover, she testified that, in seeking the loan of November 2, 1995, she contacted no entity other than American General. In other words, she did not shop around for a loan that did not involve an agreement to arbitrate. She testified that she asked no questions about the arbitration provisions in the Note and Security Agreement. Indeed, she testified that she did not read the Note and Security Agreement. 
